OPS-54: Add/Update AA (#29)
vatnz-dev/sops: docs/aerodromes/Class-C/NZAA/index.md

--8<-- "includes/abbreviations.md"

## Positions

| Position Name     | Callsign | Usage      |
| ----------------- | -------- | ---------- |
| Auckland Delivery | NZAA_DEL | Secondary  |
| Auckland Ground   | NZAA_GND | Secondary  |
| Auckland Tower    | NZAA_TWR | Primary    |
| Auckland Approach | NZAA_APP | Primary    |
| Auckland Control  | NZAA_CTR | Primary    |

## Event Only Positions

| RTF Designator        | Callsign   | Usage               |
| --------------------- | ---------- | ------------------- |
| Auckland Control      | NZAA-R_CTR | Traffic Management  |
| Christchurch Director | NZCH-D_CTR | Staff Only Position |
| Auckland Finals       | NZAA-F_APP | Traffic Management  |
| Auckland Departures   | NZAA_DEP   | Traffic Management  |

!!! Danger
    The above positions require the approval of either the VATNZ Events Director or Operations Director to be staffed

---

## Layout

> Auckland Airport has one runway 05R/23L, and it home to around 100 gates located around the airport. Auckland is New Zealand's largest international airport serving over 57 airports with 24 airlines. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Auckland Airport has one runway, 05R/23L, and is home to around 100 gates located around the airport. Auckland is New Zealand's largest international airport serving over 57 airports with 24 airlines. 
```

VFR Helicopter Operations are frequent within the Auckland CTR/C, with "Eagle" the police helicopter frequenting the control zone the most. Auckland Tower may clear an aircraft to operation in on of the three sectors within the CTR/C, but for each arrival and departure must ensure the instrument sector is kept clear. Also note that aircraft transiting the CTR/C usually track via the active runway's threshold to ensure seperation from other aircraft. 

Inbound VFR aircraft from the north will usually be give an instruction to hold over Mangere Town to facilitate an IFR arrival until there is room for the VFR aircraft to land. 

## Pushback

Pushback and Start up clearances are managed by the Ground Controller. Pilots can expect to recive a "Tail Facing" direction with a pushback clearance (doesnt normally include aircraft from regional gates). This can be to facilitate other departures or arrivals, with the layout of the taxiways, pilots are generally assumed to not block other taxiways.

### Domestic 

> Aircraft pushing back from gates 20-22 normally will push back onto D1/D2 depending on other movements or incases onto B. Aircraft on 24 can be pushed back to whereever the controller sees suitable at the time. Aircraft on 28-33 shall generally be pushed facing the direction of the active runway, although given the layout that can change. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aircraft pushing back from gates 20-22 normally will push back onto D1/D2 depending on other movements or in some cases onto B. Aircraft on 24 can be pushed back to wherever the controller sees suitable at the time. Aircraft on 28-33 shall generally be pushed facing the direction of the active runway although, given the layout, that can change. 
```

For stands 28-33 there may be multiple aircraft pushing at once and along with arriving traffic, taxiways like B4, B5 and B6 tend to be kept clear for other aircraft. This means a tail facing direction should be given to ensure positive control. Aircraft can also be told to push clear of a taxiway eg. B5 to facilitate another aircraft arriving or departing. For example and aircraft may push off 30 and tail to the west clear of B5, while an aircraft of 31 may push tail east clear of B5. Therefore there is equal room for either aircraft to get out. Aircraft of 32 and 33 may be pushed down to the east side of B4 to facilitate other traffic at the regional gates etc. 

Aicraft on C5 requiring a push clearance will be given a "push Charlie five your discretion" clearance since it is not apart of the manourvering area, but still requires a clearance to push. 

### International 

> At international gates things are more simple, aircraft pushing off of any gate at international are given a tail facing direction and a start location. For example: "Push tail north start abeam stand 15". Aircraft tend to be towed forward but we will ignore this. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At international gates things are simpler. Aircraft pushing off of any gate at international are given a tail facing direction and a start location. For example: "Push tail north start abeam stand 15". Aircraft tend to be towed forward but we will ignore this. 
```

## Taxiing 

> With the way the taxiways are layed out at Auckland, controllers avoid using taxiway A where needed. When RWY 23L is active, domestic aircraft may be taxied where they need as they dont interat with rapid exits like A6/A8. In high traffic loads or to aliviate delays international aircraft are taxied down via B and B6 instead of all the way along A. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the way the taxiways are laid out at Auckland, controllers avoid using taxiway A where needed. When RWY 23L is active, domestic aircraft may be taxied where they need as they don't interact with rapid exits like A6/A8. In high traffic loads or to alleviate delays international aircraft are taxied down via B and B6 instead of all the way along A. 
```

> When RWY 05R is active any domestic aircraft or aircraft past domestic will be given taxi via B and L or aliviate the possiblilty of departures mixing with arrivals. Taxiway M may be utilized by contollers to get aircraft to A10 while there is an aircraft taxiing to A9. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When RWY 05R is active any domestic aircraft or aircraft past domestic will be given taxi via B and L or alleviate the possibility of departures mixing with arrivals. Taxiway M may be utilized by controllers to get aircraft to A10 while there is an aircraft taxiing to A9. 
```
